Add episode 47 (#448)
trinodb/trino.io: _episodes/47.md

---
layout: episode
title: "47: Meet the new Trino maintainers"
date: 2023-03-15
tags: database memory in-memory apache ignite
youtube_id: ""
wistia_id: ""
sections:
- title: "Trino releases"
  desc: "411-416"
  time: 
---

## Hosts

* [Cole Bowden](https://www.linkedin.com/in/cole-m-bowden), Developer Advocate
  at [Starburst](https://starburst.io)
* Manfred Moser, Director of Information Engineering at
  [Starburst](https://starburst.io)
  ([@simpligility](https://twitter.com/simpligility))

## Guests

> * [James Petty](https://github.com/pettyjamesm), ___ at AWS

Author: @pettyjamesm can you fill in what title you'd want here?

Reviewer: “Senior Software Engineer” works

> * Also Manfred. Kind of.

Reviewer 2: hahah

> ## Releases 411-414

Reviewer 2: 416

* `migrate` procedure to convert a Hive table to Iceberg.
* Join and `LIKE` pushdown in Ignite.
* Support for `DELETE` in Ignite.
* `procedure` table function for executing stored procedures in SQL Server.
* Faster join queries over Hive bucketed tables.
* Faster planning for tables with many columns in Hive.

[Trino 412](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-412.html)

* New `exclude_columns` table function.
* Support for `ADD COLUMN` in Ignite.
* Support for table comments in PostgreSQL connector.
* Faster sum(`DISTINCT ...`) queries for various connectors.

[Trino 413](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-413.html)

* Support for `MERGE` in the Phoenix connector.
* Support for table comments in the Oracle connector.
* Improved performance of queries involving window functions or `MATCH_RECOGNIZE`.

[Trino 414](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-413.html)

* Experimental support for tracing using OpenTelemetry.
* Support for Databricks 12.2 LTS in Delta Lake connector.
* Support for fault-tolerant execution in Redshift connector.
* `sequence` table function.

## Introducing the two new Trino maintainers

> Manfred should hardly need an introduction to Trino Community broadcast viewers,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Manfred should hardly need an introduction to Trino Community Broadcast viewers,
```

as he's been around and hosting episodes for a while. But in the background, 

> he's also been quietly working on docs, the website, and a wide variety of other

Reviewer 2: add link to book as well

initiatives in the Trino.

James should also be familiar to anyone who has contributed on Trino. Iconically
rocking a GitHub avatar of the face of Bob Ross, it's hard to miss when he shows
up on a pull request. And working on Trino as part of AWS Athena, he's been a
major engineering contributor for the last several years, with 262 commits
under his belt and more on the way.

## What is a maintainer?

If you don't go clicking around on the Trino website fanatically trying to find
everything you can possibly read about the project, there's a chance you've

> never bumped into our [roles](https://trino.io/development/roles.html) page,

Reviewer 2: use site.url .. test locally or on the preview to verify it stays on the same host

maintainer is expected to bring these to the project participants as needed to
gain consensus. The maintainer role is for an individual, so if a maintainer
changes employers, the role is retained. However, if a maintainer is no longer
actively involved in the project, their maintainer status will be reviewed.

Or, in normal speech, a maintainer is a trusted individual with merge rights.
But with great power comes great responsibility, higher standards, and an
expectation to be an active steward of the Trino project. It's not easy to
become a maintainer - prior to Manfred and James, it had been over a year since
the most recent maintainer was appointed. The high bar of activity, quality, and
attitude is not trivial by any stretch, and so we're excited to talk to them
about the role, how they got here, and what they're looking forward to for the
future of Trino.

## The path to becoming a maintainer

### Manfred

* When did you first start working on Trino?
* What's your proudest contribution to the project?
* Have a funny story you've wanted to share to the world?

### James

* When did you first start working on Trino?
* What's your proudest contribution to the project?

> * Have a funny story you've wanted to share to the world?

Author: @mosabua @pettyjamesm - These are the questions I'm planning on asking both of you tomorrow. The goal is to keep is conversational, we'll go back and forth between you, etc. If you think there's another question I should ask or something else you'd like to talk about, let me know.

> * Have a funny story you've wanted to share to the world?

Reviewer: Sadly, I think I'm coming up empty on "funny stories", hopefully I can dodge this question :)

## PR of the episode: TBD

> 

Reviewer 2: Should be some PR @pettyjamesm worked on

Reviewer: It's been a while since I had an "interesting" PR, but maybe [Weighted Split Scheduling](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/9059)?

Reviewer: Per a conversation offline with Cole, I think we're going with [Improve TopN row number/rank](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/16753) instead.

## Trino events

> If you have an event that is related to Trino, let us know so we can add it to

Reviewer 2: Add Trino Fest!

the [Trino events calendar]({{site.url}}/community.html#events).

> Kevin Haley will be hosting an in-person event,

Reviewer 2: We can mention that this was a success and we want to hear from others

[Getting to Know Trino](https://www.meetup.com/boston-data-engineering/events/291662797/),
in Boston, Massachusetts on Wednesday, April 5. You need to register in advance,
so if you're in the Boston area and interested in attending, go sign up!

## Rounding out

> Check out the in-person and virtual

Reviewer 2: Lets remove that .. its dead/ on hiatus

* Faster planning for tables with many columns in Hive.

[Trino 412](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-412.html)

* New `exclude_columns` table function.
* Support for `ADD COLUMN` in Ignite.
* Support for table comments in PostgreSQL connector.
* Faster sum(`DISTINCT ...`) queries for various connectors.

[Trino 413](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-413.html)

* Support for `MERGE` in the Phoenix connector.
* Support for table comments in the Oracle connector.
* Improved performance of queries involving window functions or `MATCH_RECOGNIZE`.

[Trino 414](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-414.html)

* Experimental support for tracing using OpenTelemetry.
* Support for Databricks 12.2 LTS in Delta Lake connector.
* Support for fault-tolerant execution in Redshift connector.
* `sequence` table function.

[Trino 415](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-415.html) &
[Trino 416](https://trino.io/docs/current/release/release-416.html)

* A whole lot of minor performance improvements.

## Introducing the two new Trino maintainers

Manfred should hardly need an introduction to Trino Community Broadcast viewers,

> as he's been around and hosting episodes for a while, and authored

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as he's been around and hosting episodes from the beginning, and authored
```

[Trino: The Definitive Guide](https://www.starburst.io/info/oreilly-trino-guide/).

> But in the background, he's also been quietly working on docs, the website, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the background, he's also been quietly working on docs, the website, and
```

> a wide variety of other initiatives in the Trino.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a wide variety of other initiatives in the Trino community.
```

or ecosystem?

James should also be familiar to anyone who has contributed on Trino. Iconically

> rocking a GitHub avatar of the face of Bob Ross, it's hard to miss when he shows

Reviewer 2: link to some Bob Ross wikipedia page or so

> up on a pull request. And working on Trino as part of AWS Athena, he's been a

Reviewer 2: Link to Athena website

major engineering contributor for the last several years, with 262 commits
under his belt and more on the way.

## What is a maintainer?

> If you don't go clicking around on the Trino website fanatically trying to find

Reviewer 2: fanatically or frantically ?

Author: Fanatically is the word I wanted.

everything you can possibly read about the project, there's a chance you've
never bumped into our [roles](https://trino.io/development/roles.html) page,
which highlights how Trino is governed. To quote that page:

> In Trino, maintainer is an active role. A maintainer is responsible for merging

Reviewer 2: Make this a quote block .. I think just indenting does that
